Pre-workshop email
=========

This document contains standard language that can be used in the pre-workshop email
including instructions for software set-up. 

**Note:** The document is designed for a workshop using R, if using another language, 
update accordingly.

* * *

Prior to the workshop, please download and install R, [a free software environment for 
statistical computing and graphics](http://www.r-project.org/) and RStudio, [a powerful 
user interface for R](http://www.rstudio.com/). Note that R is the name of the 
programming language itself and RStudio is a convenient interface. Therefore while you 
will be working in RStudio throughout the workshop, R must also be installed on your 
computer. 

**Download:** 

* *R*: You can download R from [CRAN](http://cran.r-project.org/), the Comprehensive R 
Archive Network. It is highly recommended to install a precompiled binary distribution 
for your operating system â€“ use the links up at the top of the CRAN page.
* *RStudio*: You can download RStudio Desktop [here](http://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/).

**Install:** Instructions for installing R and RStudio are provided below, as well as 
links to videos that walk you through the process. Note newer versions of R and RStudio 
may have been released since this video, and hence the version names you come across may 
not match what you see on the video. However the general instructions should still work.

Do not worry if you run into any trouble during the installation, we will have some time 
during the workshop to help you.

- Mac / OS X: 
    - [Video instructions](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ywj6yNfc5nM) - includes RStudio 
    installation
    - Install R: Install R-3.2.2.pkg. This runs on OS X 10.9 and later (Mavericks 
    and Yosemite). To install, just double-click on the icon of the file you downloaded. 
    See [here](http://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/R-admin.html#Installing-R-under-OS-X for) for more info.
    - Install RStudio: Double click on RStudio-0.99.484.dmg and follow the prompts.

- PC / Windows: 
    - [Video instructions](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eD07NznguA4)
    - Install R: Installation is via the installer R-3.2.2-win.exe. Just double-click on 
    the icon and follow the instructions. See [here](http://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/R-admin.html#Installing-R-under-Windows) for more info.
    - Install RStudio:Double click on RStudio-0.99.484.exe and follow the prompts.

- Unix-alikes: See [here](http://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/R-admin.html#Installing-R-under-Unix_002dalikes) for more info. 

**Testing:** Do whatever is appropriate for your OS to launch RStudio. You should get a 
window similar to the screenshot you see in the video [here](http://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/). Put your cursor in the pane labelled 
*Console*, which is where you interact with the live R process. Create a simple object 
with code like `x <- 2 * 4` (followed by enter or return). Then inspect the `x` object by 
typing `x` followed by enter or return. Obviously you should see the value 8 print to 
screen. If yes, you are good to go.

**Add-on packages:** R is an extensible system and many people share useful code they 
have developed as a package via CRAN and github. To install a package from CRAN, for 
example the `ggplot2` package for data visualization (which we will use during the 
workshop) type `install.packages("ggplot2")` in your Console. This is one way of 
installing packages (there are others).